trtok <TRAIN|TOKENIZE|EVALUATE> <scheme-path> [options...] [files...]
Options:
	-c, --encoding <encoding-name>:
		Specifies the input and output encoding of the tokenizer.
		UTF-8 is used if none is specified.
	-p, --preserve-paragraphs:
		Replaces paragraph breaks with a blank line.
	-d, --detokenize:
		Doesn't apply word splitting and joining decisions. The words
		found in the input are preserved, whitespace is condensed
		into single spaces or newlines in case of sentence break.
	-s, --preserve-segments:
		Assumes sentence boundaries are already specified by newlines.
	-x, --hide-xml:
		Hides XML markup from the tokenizer and then reintroduces it
		to the output.
	-e, --expand-entities:
		Treats entities as the characters they represent. The output
		will preserve these characters as entities.
	-l, --file-list <file-list>:
		A list of input files to be processed. If mode is TRAIN
		and this setting is omitted, the file train.fl in scheme-path
		is used instead. For the EVALUATE mode, the file evaluate.fl
		is used as default. If the paths are relative, they are
		evaluated with respect to the location of the file list.
		More than 1 file list can be specified.
	-r, --filename-regexp <regexp/replacement>:
		A regular expression/replacement string used to generate
		a set of pairs of input/output files. Output files are written
		to in TOKENIZE mode and are used as correct answers in TRAIN
		and EVALUATE modes. If no such expression is given in TRAIN
		and EVALUATE modes, the contents of files train.fnre and
		evaluate.fnre in the directory scheme-path are used instead.
		If the mode is TOKENIZE, the output of tokenization is printed
		to the standard output.
	-q, --print-questions
		Prints the questions presented to the maximum entropy classifier.
		In TOKENIZE mode, the classifier's answer is present as well;
		in TRAIN mode, it is the answer induced from the data.
		In EVALUATE mode, both the answer given by the classifier
		and the correct answer are output.

The tokenizer acts on the supplied files and the files described in the file
lists. If the mode is TOKENIZE and no files have been given, the tokenizer
processes the standard input.
